---
title: Rambos
date: "2023-12-16T00:00:00+02:00"
draft: false
tags: ["software", "teams", "10x"]
---

# Rambos
A *one-person army*, alone, in the *jungle* of software, fighting
against the *peskiest*, complex, and soul-eating bugs.
He (or she) can work for hours, with a tenacity of a
human-hunter machine coming from the future, and his value
is sometimes considered 10 times the standard engineer.
Your organization depends on this individual. You cross your
fingers and pray to your deity to not make you loss this
prolific, highly-valued and know-it-all individal contributor.

## Rambos? What do you mean by that? You mean John Rambo?
A *million years* ago I read a post in a blog
(or maybe it was in one of his talks?) written by
one of the main figure in the Agile movement in Spain,
[Javier Garzás](https://www.javiergarzas.com/)
about the *Rambos* of software development.

I think it was a talk yes, he was talking about companies
that had personnel that were essential to the company.
They team was completely dependant on them. They were
not organized, nor maybe create good software, but they
solved issues and create the features the product owners
wanted. Usually they were not good in teams, and liked
to work alone, hence why Garzás was using the name
of the famous soldier that fought against his enemies
alone.

## The problem with these Rambos
While the idea of haing an experienced figure that
could provide more value than the average developer
sounds tempting, usually having this kind of unbalanced
dynamics in a team has its own disadvangates:

### Rambos tend to be undisciplined
If they feel like they are above other and have too much ego,
they can feel they are above rules, and not work on the tasks
the company need.

### Bad code quality
*If it works, it is good code* or *I understand it*, how many times
have I heard these sentences in the mouth of a Rambo...

### No documentation
Documentation is no needed for them as *I understand it* is their uttered
sentence by excelence. A code without documentation is incomplete.

### Difficult to work with
Related to all the issues above we can conclude that Rambos are
difficult to work with. Ego-driven, not keen on receiving
feedback (unless it is good), they do not care for other developers.
They simply do not empathize with other team members that will
inherit the code.

Of course, do not expect them to mentor or guide another members of
the team.

### Excesive dependence on Rambos
Apart from these faults, economically the most damaging thing a company
can suffer is the loss of a Rambo. If this Rambo that leaves the team
is the only one that is capable of maintain and develop a project.
The organization is going to need to use many resources in *untangle*
the project code. Most of the time is much easier to share knowledge
during the developing than after *everything is all set in stone*.

## Have you met with some Rambos?
I have met several several Rambos in my life.

I remember several, but most of the Rambos I have dealt with
were not technically amazing, were just people that have an
acceptable set of skills but
**they had a great confidence in their work**.

The problem is that they have a confidence in their work,
not because they haver perfected their skills, but the
resolution of tasks. i.e. they have mastered the business
knowledge so they feel confident that they are good in what they do.
But that is not true, they know the *lingo*, understand the flows,
but they are not perfecting their what it should be their main skill:
developing software.

You need to be humble and acknowledge your own limitations,
and most Rambos do not consider those. They suffer a
self-confidence *malaise* that makes them rarely doubt their work.

## How to avoid having Rambos in your team
First you need to distribute the knowledge of the inner workings
of your projects to the rest of the members of the team. Relying
on a long Enginneer is risky.

So, if you detect a Rambo, make it clear that the distribution
of knowledge must be a priority for him/her. The Rambo must not
do any task alone from now on, always have one partner, and
several reviewers.

This way, the rest of the team would start understand the issues
with your team projects, and also a culture of comunication among
them will start.

Of course, once they have had more information about the projects,
the next step should be write it down. Documentation should be a
priority for the company, but not enforced documentation that
reads good on paper but is unuseful, no, documentation that could
make easy to onboard a new Engineer in a couple of months.

## Conclusion
Do not rely on Rambos, it is better to have a team of
1.5x engineers than to have one 10x engineer that work alone, and
whose code is not understood by anybody but them.
